okay welcome everybody to the naked guru
experience
I'm Ryan Kemp just as a little forward
this discussion is part of a series in
tribute to the American ethno botanist
Terence Mckenna and is sponsored by the
psychedelic society as ever it really
helps in the production of these
discussions if listeners subscribe to
our YouTube channel
today's guest is Christopher M Besh
chris is an emeritus professor in the
department and philosophy religious
studies at Youngstown State University
where he taught for 33 years an emeritus
fellow at the Institute of noetic
scientists he is also adjunct faculty at
the California Institute of integral
studies and on the advisory board for
the growth transpersonal training and
got the Groff foundation an
award-winning teacher an international
speaker he is the author of a number of
books including life cycles dark night
early dawn and the book we will be
discussing today LSD and the mind of the
universe diamonds from heaven in which
Chris catalogs his epic journey over 20
years where he engaged in 73 high dose
LSD sessions working at 500 to 600
micrograms Chris welcome to the podcast
and thank you so much for agreeing to
this discussion hi Ryan
it's a pleasure to be here with you
today so we have a lot to cover in just
a small amount of time and I just wanted
to say from the start that your book has
been profound in my life and it's in
huge discussion around the world on
multiple groups I know the feedback from
many others it's been life changing for
many others so thank you for your work
um thank you I just like to start with a
little introduction to you in your
background and influences if you will
please Chris well I'm the last person
you would expect to have written this
book I was raised in the deep south who
grew up in Mississippi
I studied theology at the University of
Notre Dame I was actually in the
seminary for three years in high school
and one year in college I did my masters
at Cambridge and New Testament criticism
I was going to be a New Testament
scholar shifted out of that got my PhD
from Brown you
diversity and philosophy of religion but
when I came to ysu and I was looking for
the next area to focus myself I was
trained in philosophy of religion I
encountered the work of stanislav grof
who was it was life-changing I also
encountered the work of Iain Stevenson
whose research on reincarnation was
life-changing yeah but it was Stan's
work particularly that seemed to set the
course for my life I was I understood
immediately the implications of his
research for not only psychology but for
philosophy the opportunity to develop a
new philosophical methodology the
systematic exploration of consciousness
through the discipline deuced of
psychedelic states now of course the
United States had made psychedelics
illegal at that time so I divided my
life in half in my daytime job I was a
professor at the University teaching
courses in Eastern religion psychology
of religion comparative mysticism of
course called transpersonal studies and
then I began in my personal life a very
private exploration of the my deep
psyche using Stan Grof protocols for a
psychedelic therapy and then pushing
those protocols to their limits to
explore my consciousness and through
that exploration what I came eventually
to understand was the consciousness of
the universe itself
brilliant brilliant now a lot of what
we're going to discuss in in this talk
there'll be people within the
psychedelic and psychological and even
spiritual community that will be very
familiar with what we're going to talk
about and our terminology but there is a
good I'd say probably even a majority of
human beings on our planet that that are
not aware of of these kind of
psychological landscapes and the
terminology so for me I think it would
be helpful if you could please frame for
us the context that we're talking about
when we discuss LSD a lot of people
see this is a discussion on drugs when
actually it's a discussion far from it
from something far more profound yes yes
yeah we all kind of suffer from the
carryover of our experience with
psychedelics our cultures experience in
the 1960s and all the negative press
that psychedelics generated or were
generated around psychedelics when the
true story is really very different
psychedelics in general and LSD in
particular function as nonspecific
amplifiers and catalysts of
consciousness they don't give you a
particular experience they don't what
they do is hyper amplify your
consciousness and if you use these hyper
these hours of hyper amplified
consciousness carefully and
conscientiously if you shut out all
outside stimulus and focus your
attention completely from within you can
use those hours to explore and to in a
sense excavate the deep architecture of
the psyche now how to put this there are
many different ways of using these
psycho technologies you can use them in
low doses to gradually peel away the
layers of your personal unconscious you
can use them in high doses to sort of
break through those layers and plunge
yourself deep into the nature of
consciousness itself I should say that
when I was doing this work just to be
clear I was always working privately I
was always working in very controlled
circumstances either at my house or at
my wife's office my sitter for all the
years of my work was my wife my first
wife who is a clinical psychologist so I
was always protected from the world I
was isolated I was lying down I was
surrounded by pillows I was wearing
headphones listening to a very carefully
curated playlist of music which
is designed to facilitate a deepening of
the experience in wearing eye shades so
I was completely protected someone was
taking care of my body taking care of
the musical selection my job was simply
to focus on what was emerging at the
center of my experience and to allow
that experience to go wherever it would
go if you do that what begins to happen
in the early stages as you begin to
confront your personal shadow you begin
to front confront all those aspects of
your life which you are ashamed of or
embarrassed by are intimidated by are
uncertain about the deepest fears of
your life including when you get down to
it the the fear of death the fear of
extinction the fear of the
meaninglessness of life and then as you
if you keep that process these fears
kind of come to a crescendo a peak
expression and if you will can confront
that peak expression and let it take you
where it wants to take you it will take
you through some crisis which eventually
become some form of death and rebirth
some absolute shattering of your life as
you had known it of reality had us you
had known it and then you fall into a
deeper level of reality you die at one
level and awaken within a deeper level
of reality and your session shifts from
purification to an ecstatic phase of the
session and you basically are given you
enter into an intimate dialogue with the
universe and enter an intimate
initiation into successive layers of the
universe this is what working critically
therapeutically with psychedelics is all
about and would you describe that crisis
what Jung would turn the collective
unconscious well the collective
unconscious is a stratum of
consciousness that lies below the
personal unconscious so in Jung's model
every first encounter when we go below
our conscious mind we encounter our
unconscious mind our personal
unconscious but if you can go deeper
than your personal unconscious you enter
into a stream of awareness which seems
to be a collective stream shared by all
human beings of your species so this is
Jung's collective psyche right and if
you go deeper than that
you enter into still deeper streams of
consciousness entering into what some
would call global consciousness but you
can enter into levels of consciousness
that go beyond space-time reality
altogether enter into archetypal levels
of consciousness enter into complete
states of dissolving into non duality in
what might be called causal oneness and
you can enter deeper states of
consciousness even than that so it's
it's a long journey with many levels of
exploration along the way so in in your
view like the view of Jung and in many
spiritual texts and many religious texts
that we have our personal individual
mind but the universe itself is a mind
of oneness of its own it would that be
correct
yes and are as I experience it at least
our individual mind is a fractal
embodiment of fractal manifestation of
this larger cosmic mind so at one level
there is a functional duality which we
might think call it small mind and the
big mind but at a deeper level there
really isn't a duality there is a
continuum of awareness that we are a
small actualization of fractal
manifestation of this larger cosmic
consciousness now just while we're
discussing about your technique and and
what you were or what you're up to in
these sessions
one of our questions from from from from
the Terence Mckenna
guys was about the music you were
listening to so you describe the area
where you were and that Carrollton your
lovely wife was ex-wife currently was
sitting for you but what what about the
music you were listening to the I know
this changed over time but could you
tell us a bit about that well here I was
drawing upon Helen Bonnie's work early
work in the study of the stages of
psychic psychological opening and it's
like in an LSD session I learned about
her work through Stan Groff's work and
she differentiate five stages of opening
and closing in an LSD session LSD
session is a long session it's you know
it's a six to eight hour session and
there is the early stages of latency
then the the medicine begins to kick in
then there is an acceleration of an
opening of consciousness one begins to
encounter resistances and fears as one
moves deeper the the energy continues to
build exponentially there is a peak
period and then there is you hit the
long kind of steady plateau of the
experience and then there is a long slow
gradual return so each of those stages
of consciousness are best paired with
particular types of music in their early
stages you want music to calm you and
relax you before the session actually
gets underway and then when the session
begins you want music that gives you a
sense of flow and continuity music that
can support your support your letting go
of your fears and resistances shifting
gradually to stronger music with more
climactic Cadence's and themes to
support you really letting go into the
deeper turmoil
that rises in your consciousness
eventually leading to the moments of
great breakthrough and then as you move
into the breakthrough you want music
that supports the vast expanse and the
opening of horizons that can open after
you go through a death rebirth process
and in the return you want music which
is very gentle increasingly gentle gives
you a lot of space in which to process
your experiences now again I want to
mention that all of this is contingent
on the type of psychedelic you're using
and the dose at which you're working
with now I chose to work with very high
doses of LSD I worked with 500 to 600
micrograms I started working I did three
sessions with about 200 micrograms chose
to work at five to six hundred
micrograms in a sustained protocol of
this sort and this generates enormous ly
powerful experiences I mean the process
of your consciousness it's not like
taking a hundred and 50 micrograms and
relaxing on a Sunday after Sun a sunny
afternoon under the trees it's it's a
much more powerful hyperstimulation of
your consciousness that just challenges
and shatters all the limitations of your
known mind and the music accordingly
is I found it I was important to have
very strong music engaging music I found
quickly that indigenous chanting and
music from foreign cultures was more
effective for me than classical music
it's very foreign nature made it easier
for me to surrender to the foreign
territory that I was entering into it
gave me gave my ego less room for
anything to hold on to and therefore it
was more challenging but it was more
productive in that it helped me get into
the deep material more quickly more
easily right and the indigenous music
you are using
were these kind of ayahuasca shaman
chance or were they for they were from
worldwide different different tribal
chants what invitation I have used the
scales from ayahuasca ceremonies late in
in my psychedelic life mostly after my
LSD years I mean I did this work between
1979 and 1999 between when I was 30 and
50 I'm 70 now but in the primary years I
I didn't really encounter the ayahuasca
music until much later in this process
the music tended to come from a lot of
African music a lot of Tibetan music
Indonesian music Japanese music South
American music I basically just was
always looking for music that would give
me a supportive but challenging context
against which I would allow myself to
enter into these deep States and I found
that I could only use a piece of music
approximately about about three times
after I'd used it three times the music
became encoded with the experiences that
I have had with the music and in order
to allow to avoid being kind of
repetitiously encoded or programmed by
the music I always had to be looking and
using fresh music right okay so the mind
had taken the music and you kind of knew
it and it was it was then program along
with the previous experience so yes if
you re listening to it you would go back
to the same experience or well it would
tend to pull you in that direction or at
least there was potential for it to pull
you in that direction
maybe not the second time you listened
to it but if you listen to the music
repetitively repeatedly it can it can
narrow your conscious experience instead
of expanding and opening it right so as
you just touched on there as well
you you saw this or what you came to
learn that what you were doing was a
series of iterated deaths and rebirths
in one body which is also quite in the
other literature with Stan graphs work
and whatnot so could you talk a little
bit about how you view that and what is
it relationship to actual death and
rebirth as we know it the leaving of
this form and coming back into a new
form perhaps your views on that yes well
it took me a long time to understand the
patterns of my sessions because in some
ways they started as I expected them
drawing upon Stan's map of consciousness
that he gave us in his early writings
but then after a few years they seemed
to diverge in some ways and enter into
new territory but one of the things that
I've come to understand over time is
that consciousness as many levels many
tiers operational levels and the only
way to and when you enter each time you
enter into a new level of consciousness
there is required a surrender of
everything you had known before
everything you had learned and assumed
before in order to enter into a level of
consciousness that operates by
completely different rules now it's it's
not that Chris Bosh's ego even a
softened ego can be catapulted out in
some reality and have an experience it's
more that the reality of Chris Bosh or
the atom of Chris Page is dissolved and
you dissolve into encompass encompassing
fields of consciousness itself
and when one enters a new field of
conscience the only way to learn in
these conditions
is through initiation you learn by
becoming the reality that you were being
initiated into so the early transition
going through what stan calls the
perinatal level of consciousness the
confrontation with death often reliving
birth going through repeated cycles of
death and rebirth around literally
physical thought of an apparent physical
dying but also reliving the moment of
birth and it's that our physical
existence is bound by birth and death we
get here by being born we'd leave here
by dying and therefore if our
consciousness is going to transcend the
limits of our physical existence we must
in a sense come to terms with our it's
often we transcend the limits of
time-space consciousness in an acute
reliving of how we got here and an
anticipation of our final separation
from time-space consciousness so there
is a a sense in which you truly do die
psychologically before you die
physically and it can be such an intense
psychological death that you can confuse
that with physical death and you can
think you are actually dying and there's
a sense in which you are but you're
dying psychologically psycho spiritually
rather than physically then you
transition to a deeper level of reality
you enter spiritual reality which
operates by different rules than
physical reality but in the early years
often you at least also speak for myself
I my experience of this reality was
still colored by my experience of time
and space so the assumptions of time and
space kind of placed limits on your
experience of that spiritual level of
reality and there comes a time if you
keep pushing that eventually there is an
invitation extended or a breakthrough
which you come to
where you have to let go even deeper let
go to something even deeper than your
physical identity which shatters you yet
again and takes you into yet another
level of reality which is deeper a
deeper level of spiritual reality than
the earlier level you had been
experiencing and this process repeats
itself multiple times if you if you use
your sessions in a focused way and
always pushing to explore the deepest
dimension of consciousness it's possible
now I want to say I don't advise that
people do what I did I mean really I if
I were doing it over again I would not
adopt such an aggressive strategy as I
as I adopted always pushing so hard with
such high levels of velocity I would be
much gentler on myself I would balance
high dose sessions with low dose
sessions I would balance working with
LSD which is a kind of a high ceiling
psychedelic with psilocybin or ayahuasca
which are much more body grounded
psychedelics so I'm describing something
without recommending it to be followed
or be used by other people truly I don't
but doing what I did and learning how to
navigate these waters and surviving my
own foolishness I'm just in the book I'm
just trying to tell stage by stage
exactly what happened as best I could on
this deepening immersion into the
universe and when you say pushing
forward that suggests the kind of active
an active role in the in the experience
was it was it a process of pushing
outward into these kind of further
landscapes these further psychedelics
and psychological vistas always it a
process of surrendering into them or
maybe a combination of the two it's
really a matter of surrendering the only
pushing is by the repeating of the
circumstances of availability
you you create a completely quiet and
safe container you detach yourself from
all the circumstances of your daily life
you take a powerful medicine you
surrender the yourself to the care of
another and then you open you allow
yourself to open what happens next is
beyond your control at least working
with this substance at this higher dose
is beyond your control you surrender to
a larger consciousness and and I've
longer I work with this I this material
the more became clear that there was a
larger consciousness that was guiding my
sessions guiding my education in the
sessions that was meeting me breaking me
down loving me caressing me breaking me
down some more forcing me to face
certain things challenging me to face
certain things and then thrilling me
taking me into deeper and deeper
intimacy with what I would come to
describe as the creative intelligence of
the universe the the cut it's hard to
describe when you enter so deeply into
states of consciousness that's so far
transcend your physical consciousness
how do you describe it what what
categories do you have to describe it we
could call it the cosmic mind the
universe's mind the great expanse in my
in my heart of hearts I've came to call
it my beloved because returning to such
intimacy with the very source of your
existence with the source of all
existence awakened such a deep passion
of embrace and being embraced that it
well I call it my beloved yes and I mean
what I really love about your work it
for me and and somewhat Stan gross work
is it reconciles psychology psychedelics
religion and spirituality in a way can
be
read in a way that reconciles that when
you discuss terminology and you discuss
it as your beloved Jesus may have called
that the kingdom of heaven within Buddha
may have called that dharmakaya the
Hindu Atman and so there exist kind of a
spiritual terminology that to a lot of
people is very alien and dogmatic and
separate but once viewed in the context
of your work through through the
psychedelic where one can experience
this as a direct contact with the trans
person or the the transcendent it all
fits very very nicely and you all of a
sudden become to understand what those
human beings were trying to describe
it's not something abstract it's
something that can be experienced in a
number of ways would you agree yes it
can and certainly once these experiences
become part of our cultural story they
are subject to all the distortions that
culture can bring so they can be subject
to the distortions of historically
limited perspectives to patriarchy to
all sorts of cultural constrictions but
I had the advantage of I was teaching
world religions and I was teaching
courses in comparative mysticism and so
over and over again year after year I
was studying some of the great spiritual
teachers from around the planet and if
you do this you very quickly outgrow the
limitations of your own religion of
birth and you begin to enter into this
collective perspective where you begin
to recognize a deeper fundamental core
overlap of many of the teachings of the
different great religious teachers what
what is often called the perennial
philosophy the the perennial tradition
and at the same time so there is a sense
which recognizing what people have been
talking about when they when they talk
about the divine what they talk about
when they talk about transcendence or
atman and brahman these categories
become alive for you as
has an essential vocabulary to
articulate what is becoming your natural
experience of the world and at the same
time at least in my experience pushing
as deeply into the universe as I did I
was shown over and over again that all
the religions of the last four or five
thousand years are radically and
profoundly incomplete
they are Noble initiatives in history
which reflect a certain state of human
evolution but the landscape of human
evolution the landscape of the divine
initiative and I even hesitate I don't
talk about God very much and I hesitate
to even talk about the divine because
those words are so heavily laden with
theological presuppositions that I don't
necessarily want to affirm or buy into
but basically when you when you begin to
experience the magnitude of the
intelligence that suffuses existence and
the magnitude of the compassion and an
intimate love that the creative impetus
the creative intelligence has for all of
its manifestation all of its manifest
beings it just it it just opens worlds
within worlds within worlds so there is
a both an affirming and a humble
recognition of the greatness of the
great teachers and saints of history and
at the same time a sense that even they
even they have not captured perhaps the
vastness of the great expanse of the
world of the world as it is the world of
you know our 13.7 billion year old world
and the scale of the evolutionary
project you know Sri Aurobindo said that
humanity was a transitional being and if
we don't understand what we're
transitioning to
it's hard to understand what we are even
right now everything we're doing is
taking us it's not we're not only the
culmination of everything that has been
in our evolutionary story but we're also
laying foundations for what we are in
the process of becoming and what we're
becoming is something at least from my
experience is not something that results
in a culmination of a few thousand years
out but hundreds of thousands millions
of years billions of years coming so
it's just that radical expansion of
existential horizons that that qualifies
my relationship to the world's religions
and your journey in particular I mean
what what I really enjoyed in the book
as well was your journey hasn't
necessarily been one of just love and
light and bliss and divine unfolding as
many have the kind of presupposition of
the spiritual path to do use the lack of
a better word the spiritual path they
think is some kind of love and light a
blissful path but actually it can be
very difficult very isolating very
lonely and and very nightmarish in some
some sense many people that are on on
the path whether it be through
psychedelics or whatever spiritual
spiritual practices they may be involved
in to be on that individual path can be
very difficult and what you mentioned in
your book was some of the dark side of
what you've been through very openly and
honestly voyaging especially in the in
your early sessions through the hell
realms and and in your sessions 11 to 15
you mentioned the hell realms I mean
could you could you talk about those a
little bit yeah I had I had to think a
lot about how to present the different
types of suffering and the different
types of challenges that I faced on the
journey because and in fact it was my
greatest concern in beginning to share
my story
my journey with the world with others
because I did not want them to become
scared of the unseen universe and I did
not want them to prematurely misjudge
the psychedelic method itself and I
really had to to think about this and
eventually I decided just to tell to
tell what happened to lay it out and to
tell what happened and there is great
joy and and great beauty and great
ecstasy and just I mean I wouldn't trade
these 73 days for any treasures on earth
I mean they just they showed me so much
and they gave me so much that whatever
purification processes I went through
and whatever pains I went through I paid
them gladly to have been and had been
rewarded more than fairly for what
happened along the way but the what you
mentioned the hell realms well this is
the kind of scenario I basically after
about two years of work I went through a
really crushing ego death where my my
historical existence was just turned
inside out and shattered and I thought
okay I've gone through ego death then I
won't have to go through that anymore I
won't have to go through ego death
everything's going to get better and
better now but what happened was that
very quickly within a couple of sessions
I began to enter into realms of
collective suffering that were just much
much worse than anything I went through
an ego death I entered into what
Buddhism calls the hell realms I called
it an ocean of suffering I was
systematically over two year period and
I was taken deeper and deeper and broken
down at deeper and deeper levels into
realms of collective anguish involving
thousands and thousands and thousands of
beings human beings
and thousands of years of history and
very detailed patterns of configuration
and at first I thought this must be a
deeper iteration of ego death I must be
going through a deeper form of ego death
but eventually by the time this ended I
realized that this wasn't about my
personal ego death it wasn't about
personal healing at all that somehow the
universe or something was using my
sessions to facilitate a healing of my
species of my people that in somehow in
opening myself or allowing into my
conscious awareness the unresolved
trauma of history all the terrible
things we've done to each other all the
killings and maimings and rapes and just
that gave terrible scars and the
collective psyche that somehow when a
person opens this deeply if you are
willing to let this pain and suffering
in it has a clarifying effect a healing
effect a transformational effect that
heals a certain portion of the
collective psyche of humanity now I
wouldn't dare try to estimate how large
a portion or what its impact is but I
was has taken repeatedly through these
hell realms into these hell realms and
eventually they culminated I was about
four unifor and a half years in 24
sessions in and there they culminated an
extraordinary kind of orgy of the ocean
of suffering and then I was spun out
into a deeper level of reality that laid
beyond the hill realms into archetypal
reality and at that point all the
collective suffering stopped just as the
ego death suffering stopped when I went
through ego death the ocean of suffering
stopped when I went through this
culmination and entered into archetypal
reality
but later at deeper levels as I went
into still deeper levels there were
still challenging periods that I would
go through just periods where I entered
into patterns of chaos
patterns of psychological dismemberment
patterns of just different subtle subtle
forms or ordeals there were hard to
understand because you know we're
charting some territory that lies far
far deep into the into the collective
fabric of things into the not the
collective fabric this is beyond the
collective fabric into into the
dimensions of the divine into the
dimensions of the cosmic mind itself but
every time I came into one of these sort
of patterns of our deal our patterns of
clarification I came to recognize that
these were all some form of purification
that if I allowed these things to take
place something was being lifted from my
system something was being broken open
and eventually it would culminate and
take me into yet a new stunning level of
discovery and a deeper intimacy with the
body of the divine I mean many many
people at these points were they're
going into an ocean of suffering and in
your book describes also your
experiences were sometimes violent and
vomiting and many people would say well
that's enough of that you know I'm gonna
understand I'm gonna start what what was
it that drove you forward in particular
into this I mean what was that drive to
because it could have hypothetically
been that they would never end he would
just continually you didn't know what
was was over the horizon I guess or did
you Intuit that I didn't know what was
in the horizon over the horizon but it
is something that I the perhaps the most
profound gift that Stan Grof gave me
was a trust in the universe they trust
that you could surrender yourself to
whatever was asked of you and if you did
so completely the your the universe
would in the end it would take care of
you you would go through our deals that
you may not understand but in the end
you would understand that you would get
large enough and enter deeply enough
into the universe that with hindsight
you would get a deeper understanding of
what was going on but absolute trust if
you surrender completely it will lead to
breakthrough it will leave to a
deepening initiation so and I think you
know everybody has different measures of
tolerance and different circumstances
and again I don't think it's wise to
push even though I did this as
responsibly as I could and and really
taking very good care of my body
throughout and in between my sessions I
was doing about five sessions a year I
worked for four years I stopped for six
years and then I worked for ten very
intense years so over the 14 years or 14
and a half years when I was actively
working I was averaging about five
sessions a year so I had months in
between every session to digest my
experiences to write them down to think
about them to reflect upon them and I
was doing a lot of yoga in between I was
doing a lot of meditation a lot of
spiritual practice but even doing all of
those preparatory practices I found
myself pushed to my absolute limits in
going as deeply as I did and ironically
in the end it wasn't the pain that was
the most difficult thing to manage in my
work
it was the ecstasy it was the intimacy
with the fabric of existence it was
entering into what I came to call the
diamond luminosity what Buddhism calls
dharmakaya the absolute the the clear
light of absolute reality entering into
dissolving into the light that precedes
the physical universes manifestation
dissolving into the crystalline body of
the divine that ecstasy that joy became
more difficult to manage than the pain
of getting there
and the reason it became difficult to
manage was not because of the joy itself
but because it was a temporary condition
I could not stay in that condition now
there are great masters and great beings
who can stay in that condition and all
honor always to the great ones but in my
condition in my circumstance I could
only gain temporary access to these
realities and when I would come back out
of them
I was simultaneously deeply and
profoundly spiritually satisfied and
gratified and I was left with an aching
sense of bereavement because I could not
stay I had to leave yeah I'm it reminds
me a little bit of what Baba Ramdass
used to talk about he used to say we're
all walking each other home and a little
bit about what you're you're talking
about it it one necessarily doesn't
require psychedelics in order to to go
to this place there are people that seem
to be able to do it without the use of
these tools and life itself is an
analogy for what you're talking about we
go through on a day-to-day basis
forms of suffering which we tolerate and
overcome for the good of ourselves and
the community in the society in the
human race and we are periods periods of
bliss so we are interfacing with our
reality on a day-to-day level
independently of these kind of cosmic
experiences would you agree that's the
case we're all walking together I mean
yes absolutely absolutely I mean it once
again what happens in these sessions is
that your consciousness is temporarily
amplified that's all your consciousness
is tearily
temporarily amplified so if you want to
understand what truly happens in a
session you must have an understanding
of base
what happened what's happening in life
outside of a session so in that context
my understanding of life which I I draw
from my philosophical studies and
psychological studies and then in
addition to that my psychedelic
experiences for me reincarnation is a
simple fact of life
it's just this is how life works we
incarnate there's a narrowing of our
conscious experience with an incarnation
we take on a particular persona
male/female rich-poor where we we
incarnate and the particular historical
period social conditions we live our
life as best as we can and then we die
we expand back into our deeper soul
consciousness back into spiritual
reality when we die our consciousness
expands we return to the light when we
incarnate there is a contraction into
the specificity of our next learning
exercise different gender different
social circumstance different historical
period we live and learn and then we
expand because I'm an academic I tend to
see this as like a semester you know we
choose our courses for the semester and
then we're locked in then at the end of
the semester we get some breathing space
expand so we keep this up and we're
always kind of we're in the dance of
learning to create learning the
consequences of our choices making good
choices making bad choices you know just
learning and growing and becoming more
and this is the dance of life this is
taking place and it's been taking place
for hundreds of thousands of years when
we begin to meditate without
psychedelics just we would begin to
meditate and focus on the consciousness
which is living through all of these
lives one of the things that happens is
we speed up what is taking place when
reincarnation if you want to speed up
your spiritual evolution then focus on
the fundamental inner experience of your
being and if you do that you begin to
confront
themes and issues and choices which if
you didn't do that would eventually
manifest in some conditions in the outer
physical world but if you don't want to
wait for them to manifest in the outer
physical world you can confront those
conditions in your inner psychological
world so use you actually you speed up
your evolutionary process when you focus
in your your inner being and in the
thought of the inner flow of your being
and psychedelics is simply another form
of spiritual practice which very
intensely for temporary periods of time
focuses on that fundamental core stream
of your being and so there is a
detoxification process an accelerating
process that takes you eventually deeper
and deeper home I mean deeper and deeper
there are just so many levels of home so
many levels of return but yes this is
simply we are simply dancing the dance
of life just doing it in a slightly
different form and you can stop anywhere
along the way in just as you can stop
your meditation practice you can stop
your psychedelic practice and you
continue to dance the dance in life it
is the dance I mean we touched upon this
briefly in a in a private conversation
but we discussed the idea of moving
outward from the kind of collective
egoic mind what a cart all would call
the collective egoic mind and moving
into a process of what Jung would a
process of individuation becoming an
individual and that that process can be
a very lonely process too if you if
you're not within the community they
understand you like like Jung said
loneliness is not not not from her comes
from having nobody around it comes from
not being able to express the ideas that
are important to you or that others find
it invisible this this idea the the the
journey of individuation can be a lonely
one and the road to that as you're
discussing it now is this process of
evolution and meditation and I'm sure
you've been through experiences
like many of our listeners and people
that are on these journeys I'm sure
you've been through those experiences
you know through this book and through
your life would that be correct and
saying yes and I think basically the
deeper I have gone into this on the one
hand I like I feel more deeply my
fundamental common ground with all human
beings
I don't feel unique or separated or set
aside in any way I more and more deeply
with the human condition and with the
dance that human beings are dancing
across the globe around the world and
you know in in many spiritual traditions
if we address this issue of
individuality in my book dark Natalie
dawn the last chapter of that book in
which I am discussing there a number of
things but one of the things I'm
discussing is my own psychedelic history
in the last chapter the Phaeton the name
of that chapter is the fate of
individuality because many spiritual
traditions basically say the individual
is an is an illusion individuality is
basically a it's just an illusion and
the goal is to transcend individuality
and return to the one and you the drop
returns to the ocean Vedanta thought in
India basically that the drop returns to
the ocean you dissolve into the divine
and that is coming home and and any kind
of holding on to any kind of sense of
separate existence and individuality is
basically it's it's not a fully mature
spiritual understanding or experience
and I disagree with that my experience
has been that individuality is one of
the great gifts of creation
individuality is one of the great
manifestations of existence and what we
don't want to do is live
in an isolated individuality to think
that somehow our individuality
makes us separate ontologically in with
respect to the core of our being
separate from other beings in the world
unique in the world or that our
individuality is a permanent abiding
individuality which never changes
I mean basically I agree with Buddhism
in their teaching of anata or no self or
emptiness of self that there is no
private self in the sense of a of a
separate self that all our experience is
part of the matrix of cause and effect
manifesting in a continual arising and
falling away and there is no unchanging
self there is no absolute unchanging
self over time but if you can let go of
that small sense of self that ego which
sees itself separate and unchanging and
open it and grow into a deeper
experience of individuality which is in
continuous exchange with all living
beings and in continual expansion and
growing and development and I think that
basically the maturation of that
individuality over time the maturing of
that selfless kind of individuality is
one of the great spiritual gifts of our
time-space experience so the two truths
one is the truth of wholeness the truth
of oneness the truth of
interconnectedness of interpenetration
another truth is the truth of the
learning system which experiences all
these things learns from it internalizes
it and becomes more because of it which
which is also one of the things that I
grappled with with in your book and
wasn't quite sure about was are we
talking about we have one soul which is
known as God or to many people is
linguistic reductionist terminology that
we have to kind of use is God or the
divine more our think about many
individual souls which is it or is it
both
well we can choose to use language any
way we want we can we can define our
terms as we go as long as we're careful
and we know what we're doing so one can
talk about God as the one soul of which
we are all drops within that one ocean
of soul and that's perfectly fine we can
also use the term soul to refer to the
accumulated experience of all of my
former lives integrated in a unique
individual consciousness which is as
unique as a fingerprint within a still
larger matrix of the collective species
mind and a larger matrix within the
planetary mind and within a larger
matrix of the galactic mind but a true
individual an individuality with Jay
merges so we can determine new we can
use the word soul any way we want as
long as we're clear what we're doing
with it in my experience about halfway
through my journey in session 38 as a
session I discuss in the chapter on the
benediction of blessings I had a very
interesting experience
previously 11 years previously I had the
experience when I was coming through the
ocean of suffering I had a series of
sessions which repeatedly took me back
into the same experience taking me
deeper and deeper into it which was
experiencing the totality of my life
from birth to death as simultaneously
present as a completed whole it was it
was like looking down my life from
beginning to end and seeing it and
experiencing it as a totality complete
and finished with on within itself which
was a
mines shattering experience and it and I
discuss it in the in the chapter deep
time in the soul but 11 years later I
was given I was a very deeper stage of
the work I was working at Khalsa level
reality a little reality of oneness and
in this time I had the experience of
seemingly integrating all of my former
lives they were coming in quite quickly
from different centuries different
periods and it was like wrapping a
filament of white light around a kite
spool just wrapping these lies were
coming in and were wrapping themselves
around this kite spool and at one point
they hit critical mass they fused and
when they fuse there was an explosion of
diamond light from within my chest and I
was catapulted into a state of
consciousness that was unlike any I had
experienced before I was an individual
but beyond any category or any
experience of individuality that I had
ever known before and I came to language
this in terms of the birth of the
diamond soul and he gave me I was given
a series of teachings in this session
that all focused upon reframing my
understanding of what the goal of
reincarnation is about because much of
our teaching of reincarnation comes from
cultures and times in history where the
pattern of the teaching seems to be we
are mired in illusion we grow slowly
slowly through multiple incarnations
eventually we come to a discovery of our
essential divine nature we awaken to our
divine nature and when we achieve that
awakening breakthrough we leave time
space in Hinduism the earliest term for
reincarnation was moksha escape we
escaped time and space we escaped ego
but I think all of the and the same
thing we have all of the car
mala G's of the religions of the last
4,000 years or so are all up and out
cosmologies we achieve salvation we
achieve spiritual realization
and we believe we we achieve nirvana and
when we die we move into parinirvana
final Nirvana or Nirvana without the
body they basically spiritual
realization culminates in some
off-planet
heavenly paradise whether it's the
heaven or the garden or some off planet
paradise and I think basically that is a
fundamentally incomplete cosmology I
think it represents a certain stage of
our human development but it's not the
end of the story and I think in this
experience what I was being shown is
that eventually in this long long
process of expanding and contracting
being dying and being born dying and
being born learning more learning more
over time over time sooner or later
sooner or later the soul which usually
we experience and by soul I don't I mean
the totality of all of our experiences
in all of our former lives sooner or
later the soul wakes up inside the body
the soul wakes up inside time and space
that's what I'm calling the birth of the
demon soul it is to be spiritual it is a
spiritually waking up a spiritual
maturing a psychological maturing where
we know that we are much much more than
our bodies is achill experience we know
we are more than everything weeks have
experienced during the years since our
physical birth we are no longer
attempted to identify strictly with the
limits of this particular body we have
an intuitive recognition of the breath
of all of our relationships with human
beings that we have been developing
relationships with for thousands of
years and there is a transparency not
only to other people
or to other species but a transparency
to the universe itself so that we can we
can rest we can absorb we can commune
more deeply with the the divine say in
while we are inside time and space
that's the birth of the diamond soul
this is this represents I think the next
stage of our human evolution which is a
spiritual maturation it's it's heaven on
earth it truly is heaven on earth so
what you mean is the the spiritual realm
as we know it kind of perceived that is
the dream world for those without
experience with the tools the the dream
world doesn't exist in in matter it's
it's outside of mat and that is the
source of creativity it's the source of
what some people term God the source of
the divine and that is manifesting in
matter but you're talking about the
divine the collective manifesting in
matter within the universe is that
correct yes
basically we can think of it perhaps
like the mother universe and the
daughter universe the mother universe is
spiritual reality which is continually
infusing and orchestrating and shaping
and receiving physical reality so there
is at the very quantum level this dance
that takes place at the subatomic level
we're learning that there is a continual
infusion of energy into time and space
coming from this quantum or sub quantum
realm it no 96% of the universe is dark
energy dark matter that that physical
existence is just the surface of things
yes with reincarnation we learned that
our our egoic identity is not our final
identity it's only a temporary identity
there is a deeper identity that is
emerging over long stretches of
historical time there's a soul identity
so there is I think there's just a lot
of
larger sense of the of the architecture
of the universe is a larger sense of the
landscape that we are how to we are
standing always astride two realities we
have one foot in the daughter universe
one foot in the mother universe and the
more we can make this a conscious you
know integration the more we begin to
[Music]
consciously live as the expression of
the inflowing
of this mother spiritual energy into the
divine energy of manifestation so I tend
to image this very simplistic leus one
reality is light and the other reality
is green the manifest universe the green
universe the physical world is a is the
manifest body of the divine the world of
pure light the world of pure spirit is
the other side of the divine the
transcendent divine we live the foot in
both of those realities most of the time
I guess we tend to get caught in just
the physical side of reality and so we
tend to long for the spiritual dimension
but I think as we awaken more completely
and more deeply we realize it's not
simply a matter of awakening and leaving
time and space as if something's wrong
with time and space but awakening more
completely to the fruition of the
evolutionary project inside time and
space so that can we become more
conscious creators and collaborators in
creation inside time and space it
doesn't deny the joys of heaven it
doesn't deny the joys of transcendent
reality but it is it leads to a new
cosmology it needs leads to a deeper
understanding of what the purpose and
project of physical existence is
and we didn't one of the questions that
came from one of the talents McKenna
groups from one of the members there was
its it nicely slotted in here I guess
would be that during your experiences
did you meet any entities any entities
that existed in a non atomic realm in in
the quantum realm any any entities there
that were not human souls every week we
can read about that in Rick Strassman
work the spirit molecule and some some
of the work he's done was there anything
there for you that was foreign from
there was not the collective that was
not not this one soul or was it all a
oneness
well it's interesting I have had
experiences where I have met discrete
intelligences discrete entities in
spiritual reality but on the whole that
has not been the flavor or the
trajectory of my experience and again
this is partly to do with the substances
and partly to do with how we work with
the substances the entities seem to be
particularly prominent in experiences
that involve DMT or some of the
variations of DMT ayahuasca or five Meo
DMT sometimes her straight
DMT my experience again used LSD
somewhat different I kept being
dissolved into deeper levels of
spiritual reality and it was as if I was
being dissolved not into a society of
beings though I did meet beings in
different forms but at a different at a
deeper level I was being dissolved into
deeper levels of being itself it's it
really was like being dissolved from
atomic reality leaving atomic reality to
entering into quantum reality into
fields of awareness and and and larger
pattern
of awareness so at every level there are
patterns which one could qualen could
categorize as entities but if you really
sit with each of those entities in deep
forms they eventually dissolve
themselves into yet still deeper
patterns within existence itself so on
the one hand I do I'm really comfortable
with the entities and I see the
wonderful art produced by the great
ayahuasca artists Pablo Ringo and just
the it's a universe filled with entities
and spiritual presences and I'm really
comfortable with that that does resonate
with my experience but my deeper
experience has been to be dissolved into
deeper and deeper patterns of being
rather than separate beings so just
moving then on as we look to the future
I mean we just touched upon that a
little bit but what what inclinations
you've had according to the book and
what you've just mentioned there is
you've seen will you think this process
is going and how this ties in with the
human journey not only now and and the
passive would disgust but but where it's
going into the future
I mean could you talk about your
insights there and how you think this is
unfolding at the moment particularly now
under under these circumstances of kovat
lockdown and whatnot which officers are
to something much larger much larger
yeah yeah this is one of the largest
surprises for me in this work and I'm
really cautious about entering into it
and yet I in discussion even though I
also believe it's perhaps the most
important body of visionary experience
that emerged in my work because and I'd
say it was surprising because in the
early years of my work I saw doing this
work and
terms I had a model of individual
transformation either individual healing
or individual enlightenment I was doing
this work to improve myself in some way
or shape or form but what happened was
of course in entering the ocean of
suffering it all became about collective
transformation it all became about
healing the collective and about
releasing the pains that have been
accumulated in history in the collective
psyche and then I was moved into deeper
levels and about that time in that
transition a series of visions began and
these visions were consistent from the
23rd session all the way to the 70th
session it wasn't that they were there
every session but they were periodically
I was being initiated into a particular
understanding of history a particular
understanding of human history and
repeatedly there was a sense that
humanity was coming into a period of
decisive significance a period of
profound break through a spiritual
culmination a culmination of our entire
reincarnation history that we this was
going to be a before-and-after moment
this was one of the ways it was
envisioned was I was climbing up this
mountain and on the other side of the
mountain I was in sort of shadows but on
the other side of the mountain there was
this brilliant light of brilliant Valley
with just brilliant light and that
humanity was coming into the fundamental
turning point and this went on for years
this vision of it and I eventually wrote
these down I collected them and I called
them the visions of awakening but I did
not see I had not seen how life was ever
going to carry humanity across the
threshold because when I looked at the
world around me I saw as much evidence
for our being stupid and making just
terrible choices as I did for us making
spiritually
wise choices I did not see us letting go
of our collective greed I did not see us
taking more and more responsibility for
the well-being of others some were of
course but many weren't and then in 1995
and 55 sessions into the journey the
universe took me deeply into deep into
the future deeper into deep time than it
had ever taken me before
and it took me into an experience which
I experienced not as an individual even
a spiritual individual but I experienced
it and I know this sounds outrageous but
I experienced it as the species I was
dissolved into the collective psyche so
deeply that for these hours I was our
species mind I was dissolved into the
collective psyche and in that context I
experienced a building crisis a mounting
crisis that just was taking away
stripping us of reality as we had known
it it was it was the dark night of our
collective soul it was a time in history
where a real confrontation with the
consequences of choices that we've been
making historically a real confrontation
with our poor choices we were losing
control we were we were just being
shattered it really reached a point
where I thought it was an extinction
event I thought we were all going to die
it was like being on a small island when
a hurricane comes along it comes upon it
that it just was wiping out all life on
the island and just when it was at its
peak just when it was it seemed that
death was inevitable the storm passed
and there were survivors many had been
killed but there were survivors and when
the survivors started to pick themselves
up and started to gather and find each
other and reconstitute life there was
springing forward
ringing from within us the most
extraordinary phenomenon there was this
birth of new insights a birth of new
values new understanding new priorities
new social initiatives they were
basically an unleashing of something
that we had learned something that had
taken place in the center of the human
heart in the midst of this crisis
basically just as a saint in undergoing
intense spiritual practice goes through
the purification which jonatha costs
cross calls the dark night of the soul
likewise in our collective evolution the
dark night of our collective soul a time
of complete surrender and intense
purification which breaks us down at the
center yielded to a time of great
awakening a great spiritual
manifestation a great redirection of the
human heart and of human culture it was
a true great awakening of the species
and in time in subsequent sessions I was
taken into the deep time again and I
began to be shown that this represented
not simply a historical breakthrough and
not simply a technical or economic
restructuring of our culture but it was
a truly seismic shift in the depths of
the collective psyche a pivot took place
in this global crisis a global systems
crisis which appeared to be driven by a
global ecological crisis it was a shift
in the core psyche the collective psyche
which all other human beings draw from
on their individual life so when the
collective psyche shifted it meant that
every generation that was born on the
planet after the shift took place they
were being informed by and were infused
by the
new blueprint this new psychological
blueprint this new capacity and I think
what I was experiencing was a true
spiritual awakening out of just
individuals but of our entire species
and this was deepening deepened in the
years that followed so ever since this
time I have come to understand that my
personal belief in the visionary
experiences that were given to me in the
sessions were showing that Humanity is
coming to a decisive moment in its
evolutionary journey we were coming into
a time of critical challenge and a time
requiring maximum effort and maximum
clarity we are literally this is a time
of labor gestation is long the period of
gestation is a long time but the time of
labor is short and intense and
convulsive we have been preparing for
this time in history for thousands and
thousands of years through reincarnation
reincarnation reincarnation but now we
have entered into a time I think in
which we are giving birth to the future
human we are giving birth to a different
kind of human being and I think we are
giving birth to the diamond soul I think
the soul is going is entering into
history in a collectively unmanifested
nted fashion I think the world as we
know it was designed by ego and the ego
is a magnificent and beautiful
psychological structure I mean I really
I respected enormous Lee but ultimately
the ego is a fragmented psychological
structure and with it leaves us cut off
from each other and from existence
itself the world designed by the ego
creates categories of problems of
division which we know and recognize
well in history now dividing between
races dividing
between religions dividing between
classes just division division division
but the birth of the diamond Sol
represents a new starting point human
for Humanity a deeper and I think the
core of it is this a deep experience of
oneness not just as a concept or as a
category but a profound awakening of
oneness within the human heart and the
world that is a species which is
grounded in this experience of oneness
builds a different world than the ego
bills and I think the diamond sold is we
are giving birth to the diamond Sol in
history and I see the Cova 19 not at
this crisis but perhaps as an early
stage of this fermenting crisis it is a
crisis which is very painful and very
difficult but it's teaching us something
if we learn the lessons that kovat 19 is
health opportunity to teach us if we
learn about well here everybody would
put their own fill-in-the-blanks at this
point what it is trying to teach us but
if we learn the lessons of compassion if
we learn how bad things go when we give
ourselves over to egoic leadership and
divisive patterns of leadership and
self-centeredness within the species
then things go very badly but if we open
into other caring if we open into
selflessness if we open into reining in
some of the patterns of blind repetition
and greed then we are learning things
which will be very valuable to us when
the deeper crises that are coming
manifest and all you have to do is is
just read the works of the deeply
informed ecologist and environmental
students of history to appreciate the
the scale of what we are coming into as
we increasingly heat the planet and and
whether that the tragedies that are
going to be generated that are being
generated
by our changing climate this I think is
really the the crisis the deeper crisis
that kovat 19 is giving us an
opportunity to prepare for yeah
not beautiful it's it's in the
collective mind as well I think that
we're all on an individual level aware
that something is brewing or something
is coming and I don't know if that's how
it's been throughout history of the
humanity that we've always felt there's
some kind of cataclysmic event on the
horizon but now more than ever it's
certainly in in the collective mind and
our habits our nature our way of being
at this moment is is both destructive
but we're also seeing this kind of
psychedelic Renaissance and we're also
seeing a lot of people looking to the
Past for answers about the future more
than ever and I think in the past two
years then in say in the past 20 but
yeah it's mm-hmm it's a big part of of
your vision but you say that the co wait
what do you think is the co but is only
a small part of that but as you look to
the future do you see a very like Maeve
throughout evolution previous species
have had to die off in order for new
versions of ourselves to evolve yeah do
you see like a catastrophe a world
ending catastrophes that what you're
you're pointing to well I want to be
careful I'm not a visionary outside of
my psychedelic work yes I don't I don't
have a psychic ability to see into the
future and when I only have what I saw
and what I was shown in my visionary
experiences inside my psychedelic
sessions these have been consistent in
uniform
I trust the consciousness that that gave
me these visions they seem to be
deliberate and well-crafted so I trust
them but I recognize that one person's
it visions are only one person's visions
and they don't necessarily hold the same
value to other people so what I saw was
a world coming into acute crisis a depth
of crisis that was literally breaking us
down at very deep and fundamental levels
and it was only when we when we had
reached intolerable amounts of suffering
that we were willing to start making
choices that we were not willing to
contemplate previously and in making
these new choices choices for the
greater good choices for our children's
children's children choices that were
necessary in order to pull ourselves
back from this destructive binge that we
had been on for the last several hundred
years then a new future began to emerge
but I was not given specifics about how
when or why I wasn't told when I wasn't
told why it was just very very broad
strokes but what I was given was the
inner experience of this death and
rebirth as a species and I was given
some understanding of the collective
mechanisms see we have we have to travel
a great distance in a very short period
of time how can we really mature to the
driest of the level to the challenges
that we are facing as fast as we need to
in order to survive what we are letting
loose on the globe and I was given some
insights into mechanisms that are
operating at the collective level I
won't go into these in detail because
they laid out in the book but it has to
do with how systems operate when they
move into nonlinear into nonlinear
ranges non-equilibrium system some of
the physics of non-equilibrium systems
as they apply to psychic fields and the
psychic field of the human family as a
totality you know so to me I guess the
some of the greatest gifts that were
given what I was given at the end of my
journey
was to be taken deep into the future and
was given the privilege of experiencing
this what I'm calling the future human
the the child that we are giving birth
to what the future human feels like
looks like and if I tried to describe it
to you I'll probably end up weeping
because it was so beautiful
this being was so beautiful so
magnificent we were talking about a
healed humanity truly healed right down
to our bones a humanity with an
absolutely radically expanded heart what
Christians look at Jesus and called the
sacred heart the heart the one heart a
mind open to the intelligence of the
universe in new and profound ways a
truly enlightened humanity one in all
just a magnificent shift in the common
ground of human experience and I believe
that just as a mother when she has her
baby in her arms
after a hard labor forgets the labor at
one level because the child is with her
down likewise humanity will is going
through this very very intense birth
process but when this birth sees its
goal when the child is born when the
future human is born on the earth and I
don't have any particular vision of
again how when I don't know whether it's
this long gradual or it's a sudden
cathartic thing but when this child is
born in history we will look back on the
terrible pains that we went through to
give birth to it
and we'll say it was worth it maybe if
we had been smarter we could have done
it easier and faster
maybe we brought some of this on our own
heads unnecessarily but when the child
is born it will be worth it yeah you
pose the question
in your book you said what is the value
of true but temporary knowledge moving
into these planes and coming back and
being able to sustain them you mentioned
you have different answers at different
times and so I thought it'd be
interesting to to ask what what is your
answer to it at the moment at this time
mm-hmm well the soft underbelly if if we
do this work in order to facilitate not
simply temporary highs or temporary you
know insights but if we do it in order
to encourage or facilitate a maturation
of our psycho-spiritual life which leads
ultimately to a shift in the on the
ground of our consciousness an abiding
shift to shift not only into peak
experiences but a shift into Plateau
experiences if we approach psychedelic
experience with this long term
maturational view then the soft
underbelly of psychedelics is their
temporary nature you know we enter into
these states you can't stay there we're
going to be in there only for a few
hours at a time and then we come out we
have to kind of reconcile ourselves with
the limitations of the the practice that
we are engaging in but if we use those
hours carefully if we use them
conscientiously I believe they do
accelerate our evolution and then they
can by showing us where we are going
they can they begin to act as kind of
strange attractors drawing us into our
individual individual and collective
evolution faster more deeply and so it
is frustrating to sort of you know at
two o'clock in the afternoon to be so
deeply immersed in the wisdom of the
universe and then by 10 o'clock that
night you know they're your ordinary
mind has congealed around your
self again and no matter how hard you
try you're not living in the same
reality that you were in before the
value what is the value of true but
temporary knowledge and I think in my
case at least I pushed myself perhaps
deeper than was wise into deep deep
temporary knowledge and so again if I
were doing it over again knowing what I
know now I would be more patient with a
slower pace of my own personal evolution
I would and and the way this manifested
for me is I reached a point after 20
years of this work where I knew it was
time for me to stop my sessions and more
importantly the consciousness that I was
engaging knew it was time for me to stop
and it ended our sessions I did not
think they were going to end I did not
know we were ending but after this very
very deep what I call the final vision
the last of my great visions in the 70th
session there were three sessions which
I call the goodbye sessions it it
basically drew our work together to a
close and I had been given so many
blessings and had been so many Joy's on
the journey I thought that I could
simply withdraw and I would be able to
be nurtured for the rest of my life by
these blessings and I had been and and
that is true but there's something else
that happened and that is I began to to
experience a profound existential
loneliness because I was not able to go
back into this deep deep intimacy with
the divine in even though I continued to
do spiritual practice the spiritual
practices that I was doing if I did them
from multiple lifetimes perhaps I would
be able to move back there
but in this lifetime I knew I would not
reach that deep until I died and I found
myself very
at leave just waiting to die so I could
return to my beloved and that that's not
a good way to live and it took me a
while to me literally ten years after I
stopped my sessions
to get fully grounded to recommit myself
into living within my incomplete self
inside time and space with some
contentment for the remainder of my
years and that's why I think true but
temporary knowledge can be very valuable
transcendence can teach us who we are it
can teach us what we're doing here it
can teach us maybe what the purpose of
our life is but if you plunge too deeply
into transcendence as I did I think it
can also undermine your sense of
belonging to the earth and that is an
equally important lesson that it took me
a while to you know kind of reground
myself in after I stock my sessions but
the other thing I found it was so hard
after I stopped it wasn't just the loss
of communion
it was the sickness of silence it was
having to stay silent about my
psychedelic experiences I'm a teacher I
love to get to learn new things and to
share that learning with others but in
my society I was never allowed to bring
my experiences to my colleagues to bring
my experiences to my students I always
had to keep silent about my psychedelic
experiences because they were illegal
and but now that I've retired I retired
from my university a little early in
order to write diamonds from heaven or
LSD in the mind of the universe and now
you know I've given myself permission
I'm passed the statute of limitations
for these psychedelic crimes and now I
can say whatever I damn well please and
that's quite it is liberating it's
because it's like coming out of a
psychedelic closet it's just as
liberating as coming out of any closet
where we are forced to deny the truth of
our being and so writing this book has
really been
very healing and facilitated a deeper
level of my own experiences because now
that I can talk about them now that I
can just talk about them freely and
receive other people's experiences
freely in the expanded psychedelic
conversation now I can be in my physical
existence who I have been also in my
shamanic psychedelic existence so the
two halves of my life are coming back
together and I'm beginning to be
experienced levels of wholeness as an
incarnate being that I could not
experience as long as I was being
forcibly held silent to my experiences
would you say you have any happiness or
contentment from your experiences
obviously I completely empathize and
understand with that separation and that
I don't know if it's a feeling of
rejection but certainly like the Reve
menteur I'm not being able to return to
those those very unique landscapes and
those unique feelings but with in now in
life post sessions have you found a
deeper happiness and contentment are you
still around us often says he hasn't
cured one neurosis so his entire
spiritual journey and he still he ever
used to be and so he he never really
changed nor found much much deeper
deeper liberation I guess how is it for
you hmm
wonderful Ram Dass what an interesting
man absolutely great respect there is a
deep relaxation when you I have had so
many existential questions answered I've
had so many existential pains soothed
with the clarity of truth of experience
I feel I've been given a much deeper
understanding
an appreciation for how life works and
in that knowing in in that philosophical
and spiritual knowing there is a great
relaxation and a sense of deeper
cooperation with life more than that
there's been in the intimacy with the
creative intelligence of the universe
and experiencing the depth of love that
the universe pours into me into each of
us into all of us together there's just
been such a there has been a profound
spiritual fruition which probably has
not cured me of all my falls but I
certainly hope it's tilted the balance
and has helped me become a kinder person
a a calmer person a more compassionate
person you know enlightenment that's a
tricky thing maybe one day but if I were
really aiming for enlightenment as this
is classically conceived living in a
condition of deep transparency to our
eternal abiding nature living
perpetually conscious of that aspect of
our nature which never begins never ends
its purpose is never divided it is the
the unchanging truth on which all
changing truths dance if that were the
goal of this work I would have done the
work differently I would have worked
with very very small doses the purpose
of my work or the project of my work it
began kind of pursuing enlightenment but
it became that just fell away early on
the work became to support the
enlightenment of my people to support
the transformation of humanity as a
whole and then beyond that it became a
process of cosmic exploration to enter
as deeply as I could into the
inside of the universe and was given the
opportunity to see things and experience
things that are went far beyond my
ability to stabilize as an abiding
consciousness when I returned so it's
not from this perspective I don't
consider myself a Li's of attempted
enlightenment I see them as successes of
of cosmic exploration and which of
course is related to the condition of
awakening our enlightenment at one level
but at another level it's different it's
really quite different you don't have to
go back to the beginning of the Big Bang
to be enlightenment you don't have to
experience archetypal reality you don't
have to experience the future evolution
of humanity to be enlightened this is a
just a different project
I hope however in the deepening intimacy
with the divine I hope there's been some
progress towards spiritual awakening up
you know healing the fragments of that
we all carry from our historical
experiences I feel a deep peace and
contentment and perhaps most notably not
only am I not afraid of dying I'm
looking forward to it it's absolutely no
fear for me because I know I know where
I'm going yeah and I know where we're
going you know we're going deeper into
that light so if you're if there were
one thing I wish I could give to other
people from my experiences it would be
this loss of fear of death because if
you're afraid of dying
your entire cosmology is upside down yes
this is where this is the hard place
this is the time spaces where the hard
work is done spiritual reality is is its
its reward it's home it's light
have you been tempted in these later
years to
go back I you know aldous huxley on his
deathbed his wife injected him with a
large amount I think is around 500
micrograms of LSD and read him the
Tibetan Book of the Dead
have you been tempted to go back into a
high dose session all these years which
I think it's been 20 years hasn't it
yeah actually he was injected with two
low dose sessions very low doses yeah
just low and Laura Huxley discusses this
in her biography of autobiography no I
mean I've done I've done low dose
sessions with LSD in the years since I
stopped but generally I find it it
doesn't work well with me now I mean
I've had wonderful experiences but I've
pushed my system so hard with the high
doses that it is almost as if I've
developed an allergy for it and and if I
were to take a massive dose of LSD today
I would not be able to get back to where
I was regularly journeying in the last
year's of my work and it has to do with
energy every step into a deeper level of
reality is it moves you into a more
intense level of energy and there is an
accumulation of energy that builds up in
your being in your over multiple
sessions so I found that my system was
accumulating energy storing this energy
from session after session even though
those sessions were months apart
it was accumulating a massive quantity
of energy which would then focus that
energy and lead to a breakthrough into a
new level of consciousness so those
breakthroughs are being paid for not
simply by hours of intense psychedelic
work there sometimes we're being paid
for by years a psychedelic work so if I
wanted to get back into some of the
territory I was exploring of the diamond
luminosity that territory I think it
would take me year
of conscientious work to develop the
momentum the energetic momentum to tap
that deeply into the universe again so
at this point in my life I'm content
with more conventional spiritual
practices a daily meditation practice if
I do use psychedelics sometimes I use
gentler psychedelic psilocybin or
ayahuasca which basically helps connect
me to the fields of knowledge that
continue to surround me deriving from my
my LSD work so I experienced them not as
breaking new ground but is helping me
integrate and absorb what I've already
done into my present being which is how
I experienced my my meditation practice
I'm not trying to go back to where I was
into my most intense psychedelic
experiences I'm not trying to break new
ground
I'm simply facilitating a deeper
absorption of the reality that I touched
on those days into my physical being
like Alan Watts famous adage when you've
got the message hang up the phone
what are your thoughts on that well
that's no I don't thought I would just
say that's not been my experience I mean
this is Houston Smith to use that adage
he had had about he says in his book
cleansing the doors of perception after
he'd had about a half-dozen psychedelic
experiences the bummers increased and it
just really wasn't working for him and
my experience is it's when the bummers
increases when the deeper cleansing is
taking place and that's when it begins
to get interesting that's only when
death starts to really pound on you that
you're hard that it really begins to get
interesting when you're having to lay
your life on the line then it's getting
interesting so to me if we say once you
get the
message hang up the phone well okay but
what is the message and there's so many
messages and so many levels nobody
judges for another but to me there are
messages that come through in the early
work and they're magnificent and there
are messages that come through in the
middle work and their messages that come
through in the later work and if I had
stopped with the early messages it would
have been perfectly okay absolutely
perfectly okay but I would have missed
some of the things that came later yes
though - you know so I think everybody
has to make the choices of how much is
good for them how much serves them and
then whether it becomes
counterproductive and I'll own right up
front that I think I bit off a little
bit more not not more than I could chew
because I chewed it all but I bit off
more maybe than was wise for for me to
buy it off yeah well you know Chris
thank you very much for your time here
and this conversation it's really has
been brilliant and you've been massively
inspiring in my life and and I know the
lives of many others that are involved
in these kind of paths and pursuits and
these things that sometimes can seem so
foreign and so abstract that when when
you've taken the time as you have done
to rigorously catalogue everything you
went through over these years and put it
in a book for some of us to read that is
very reassuring because it can it can
let us know that what's happening to us
and what's happening to others is not
just some random random happening it's
like what it it happened to this guy I
mean he's got a PhD and he's a teacher
and he lives a very normal life and and
so you're not completely insane and
that's what your book has done for me
and for many others I thank you for that
Thank You Ryan it truly is a it's an
honor to have this discussion with you
thank you for the privilege of being
able to share this time together it's a
true joy for me and a privilege in my
old age just to be able to have these
kind of conversations speak
you are there's a whole new generation
and a generation behind this generation
which is going into this territory and
we all have a lot to learn from each
other yes so your book is available on
Amazon and I don't know if you have a
website do you Kris you know I'm afraid
it's not finished yet it will be out I
hope in a month or two I've just been
slow and busy I've just moved to North
Carolina it's load up some of these
things but the website will be crisp
acecomm and but for the time being
people can find my articles and essays
on a website called academia.edu and and
the book is on Amazon yep and it's also
very nicely enjoyed as an audio book on
audible which I can recommend to people
because it's read by you also so I think
yeah I enjoyed that
I think the written the word the spoken
word has a power even beyond the written
word and I really enjoy what value the
opportunity to be able to read the book
for for listeners absolutely okay Chris
well thank you very much yeah and they
go so yep thank you Chris thank you love
and blessings
[Music]